docs/guidelines/deon.md, before:

# [DEON Ethics Checklist](https://deon.drivendata.org/)

### Overall evaluation

#### Technical Implementation

Useful: 5/5

Comprehensive: 3/5 - needs to be combined with project-level tools, and other support for answering the questions asked, and versioned - and also would work best if customised

Technical scalability:

Easy to customize (data): 5/5

Easy to customize (visualizations / analyses): n/a

Easy to integrate: 5/5

Robustness: 5/5

#### User-friendliness (system usability scale)

Answer with strongly agree (5), agree (4), neutral (3), disagree (2), strongly disagree (1)

Feel free to add comments and justifications!

1. _I think that I would like to use this system frequently:_ agree (4) as part of a project once the project has been established, but needs to have some work done to customise for each use - DK could create its own template for each different DataDives

2. _I found the system unnecessarily complex:_ disagree (2)

3. _I thought the system was easy to use:_ strongly agree (5) - it’s a checklist, clear and easy to understand

4. _I think that I would need the support of a technical person to be able to use this system:_ strongly disagree (1) - this is a tool for data scientists

5. _I found the various functions in this system were well integrated:_

6. _I thought there was too much inconsistency in this system:_

7. _I would imagine that most people would learn to use this system very quickly:_

8. _I found the system very cumbersome to use:_

9. _I felt very confident using the system:_

10. _I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with this system:_

### Description of the tool

_What is its purpose?_ - adds an ethics checklist within a data science project/repository

_Who is the intended user?_ - data scientist who uses python; in a long term project, perhaps the project manager should be the person who takes responsibility for making sure that the questions get asked, check in e.g. every 2 weeks as part of an agile sprint

_What is its scope (algorithms, data, types of challenges)?_ - prompts users to think about different aspects of ethics within their project; provides an accountability tool for whether a team has/hasn’t done something; broad within coding; provides a documentation page that shows whether something has/hasn’t been done; can communicate the ethical aspects of the project

### Best for:

_What should practitioners use this tool for? Are there any scenarios / use cases in which this tool is particularly helpful vs. useless?_

- used once you have decided to do a data science project i.e. doesn’t help make a decision about whether or not to do the project
- can feedback decisions during a project
- need to be working in Python (but there are rendered versions in other languages)

### Pros & cons

_What are the benefits of this tool?_

- easy to incorporate within a project

- asks clear questions

- can be customised easily to ask different questions
  What are the challenges in using this tool? \_

- needs familiarity with Python

- doesn’t tell you where to find answers to the questions e.g. fairness tools

- doesn’t necessarily reflect later changes once a box has been ticked - needs to be versioned and incorporated into devops process

### Limitations, especially any technical issues

E.g. difficult to integrate or customize

- Python

### Case study demo with screenshots

Examples of some of the questions that are included by default in the checklist:

Commit message:

added link to the tool

docs/guidelines/deon.md, after:

# [DEON Ethics Checklist](https://deon.drivendata.org/)

We evaluated the [Ethics Checklist](https://deon.drivendata.org/) tool developed by DEON.

### Overall evaluation

#### Technical Implementation

Useful: 5/5

Comprehensive: 3/5 - needs to be combined with project-level tools, and other support for answering the questions asked, and versioned - and also would work best if customised

Technical scalability:

Easy to customize (data): 5/5

Easy to customize (visualizations / analyses): n/a

Easy to integrate: 5/5

Robustness: 5/5

#### User-friendliness (system usability scale)

Answer with strongly agree (5), agree (4), neutral (3), disagree (2), strongly disagree (1)

Feel free to add comments and justifications!

1. _I think that I would like to use this system frequently:_ agree (4) as part of a project once the project has been established, but needs to have some work done to customise for each use - DK could create its own template for each different DataDives

2. _I found the system unnecessarily complex:_ disagree (2)

3. _I thought the system was easy to use:_ strongly agree (5) - it’s a checklist, clear and easy to understand

4. _I think that I would need the support of a technical person to be able to use this system:_ strongly disagree (1) - this is a tool for data scientists

5. _I found the various functions in this system were well integrated:_

6. _I thought there was too much inconsistency in this system:_

7. _I would imagine that most people would learn to use this system very quickly:_

8. _I found the system very cumbersome to use:_

9. _I felt very confident using the system:_

10. _I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with this system:_

### Description of the tool

_What is its purpose?_ - adds an ethics checklist within a data science project/repository

_Who is the intended user?_ - data scientist who uses python; in a long term project, perhaps the project manager should be the person who takes responsibility for making sure that the questions get asked, check in e.g. every 2 weeks as part of an agile sprint

_What is its scope (algorithms, data, types of challenges)?_ - prompts users to think about different aspects of ethics within their project; provides an accountability tool for whether a team has/hasn’t done something; broad within coding; provides a documentation page that shows whether something has/hasn’t been done; can communicate the ethical aspects of the project

### Best for:

_What should practitioners use this tool for? Are there any scenarios / use cases in which this tool is particularly helpful vs. useless?_

- used once you have decided to do a data science project i.e. doesn’t help make a decision about whether or not to do the project
- can feedback decisions during a project
- need to be working in Python (but there are rendered versions in other languages)

### Pros & cons

_What are the benefits of this tool?_

- easy to incorporate within a project

- asks clear questions

- can be customised easily to ask different questions
  What are the challenges in using this tool? \_

- needs familiarity with Python

- doesn’t tell you where to find answers to the questions e.g. fairness tools

- doesn’t necessarily reflect later changes once a box has been ticked - needs to be versioned and incorporated into devops process

### Limitations, especially any technical issues

E.g. difficult to integrate or customize

- Python

### Case study demo with screenshots

Examples of some of the questions that are included by default in the checklist:
